---
title: "About hugs"
collection: blog
permalink: /blog/about-hugs
---

One of the biggest cultural shocks that have had since I moved to the US is related to new norms of physical touch when interacting with other people. Just as a clarification, I am not talking about anything romantic or sexual, just daily experiences of physical contact. So, back in Colombia everyone has physical interactions with each other all the time! When someone arrives to a room full of new people, everyone says hi with a kiss in the cheek, and moving from that to a hug happens relatively quickly. Also, during a conversation, it is pretty common to touch other person shoulder, or arm, or knee… and of course everything depends on the level of trust and closeness, but physical contact is something I have never had to thought of that much before moving to the US. 

At the beginning, we were still in COVID times (I don’t know if those are or will ever be over, but let’s assume they are), so interactions were distant. Obviously, social distancing was something that we also did in Colombia as a response to the pandemic, so when I arrived it was unclear to me how much of the physical contact behaviors were due to COVID concerns or just the cultural way of interacting with others. However, as part of my training as a student-employee at Duke, I had to take some virtual courses on ethical behavior. Part of the lessons were about explicit consent for physical touch. Right now, I don’t remember every detail, but I do remember thinking that I was expected to ask for verbal consent every time I was going to touch someone just on their shoulder (this was the example they used in the video). It even got me kind of scared because of course I don’t want anyone to feel harassed, but in my experience that is mostly not a harassment behavior. 

It happened to me a couple of times that I touched someone’s arm when talking and I noticed they felt uncomfortable, or that I hugged someone (without thinking about it) and felt their muscles getting tense. Thankfully, all of them were friends and I am sure they didn’t think I was harming them in any way. However, this made me really self-conscious about physical contact and touching people, so I just started being extremely careful with everyone. You would think that that’s ok, the solution as easy: just don’t do it, don’t touch people, don’t hug people, you will avoid making them uncomfortable and that’s fine. 
I wish it was as easy as that. What happens now is that I feel that I have become super awkward at some interactions, and that’s just because I don’t know what to do and how to be. I guess that part of who I am and how I interact is, for instance, expressing how happy I am to see someone by giving them a hug…part of my expressions when talking are touching someone’s arm when I am surprised or excited about something… my reaction when I see someone mad or upset is to hug them or touch their shoulder, or their back. Now, however, I find myself in so many cases not really knowing what to do, I don’t know how to express my emotions. I just start overthinking how to make sure that I am not making people feel uncomfortable, and then I feel I am being very unnatural and weird. Some days ago, I was really thankful with someone I recently met. My first reaction was to hug this person as a way of expressing how I was feeling. Then, I thought that I don’t want them to feel uncomfortable or forced to accept my hug, so I just did nothing. I felt really weird and unauthentic (sorry about that). So, that’s the first thing that it’s being difficult: figuring out how to behave, how to interact, and how to express my emotions in an authentic way without doing what I have always done. 

The second thing that I have found difficult is much more straight forward: I miss physical contact in daily interactions, I miss hugging people/people hugging me, I miss when someone rubs my back for whatever reason (not only extreme situations), I miss feeling ok by just laying down in someone’s shoulder… well, you get the idea. 

So, all this to say that being in another context and having to change the way in which I had been interacting for all my life is difficult. My approach until now has been to refrain myself from these interactions, but that its being hard because of what I miss and because I don’t know how to be authentic without those ways of interacting. I really want to respect other people’s desire to not be touched, but I also need to take care of myself and of who I am… my way of interacting is something that I like about me, and trying not to be that way leaves me without something. So, my new approach is to act as I act, interact how I interact, and be how I am… of course always in respectful ways. Whenever someone is uncomfortable with that… just let me know! Let’s see how it goes…  

Thanks for reading!


